I recently learned that professor Hubert
Dreyfus the philosopher and outspoken
critic of the field of artificial
intelligence has died at the age of 87
he published a lot of philosophy and did
a lot of teaching but one of the things
he's best known for and most relevant to
this channel was his work on artificial
intelligence and its limits so I'm going
to talk about that a little bit today
and focus on one of his arguments in
particular so in the 50s and 60s AI was
the next big thing
computers were tackling problems they'd
never been able to approach before
people were very excited about what was
possible and artificial intelligence
researchers were confident that true
human level intelligence was right
around the corner their reasoning was
something like this thinking consists of
processing facts using logic and rules
what you might call symbol manipulation
you have some things you know you know
the relationships between them you know
the rules of logic and you can use those
to reason about the world computers can
do this kind of symbol manipulation very
well and they're getting better over
time
so computers are able to think and
they're getting better at thinking all
the time
Dreyfuss saw some problems with this and
one of those problems was that a lot of
human thinking doesn't seem to boil down
to symbol manipulation at all it's only
one of the ways we can think it's
perhaps the most salient because it's
related to language and conscious
thought which is the part of the mind
that we're most aware of but actually a
lot of the processing seems to be
happening much slower down when you look
at something you don't think is this has
four legs and a flat top and a back so
it's a chair and this thing has four
legs and a flat top and Novac so it's a
table because I've learned the rules of
what a table is and what a chair is and
now I'm applying those rules now you
just look at the thing and you know that
it's a table the object identification
is done before your conscious mind is
even aware of anything and it's not like
your unconscious mind is doing this kind
of rules based thinking in the
background it's much fuzzier than that
and what would the rules be for
identifying chairs anyway we do need a
back do you need four legs or like any
legs at all I mean this is still a chair
is this thing is this
or this even something as simple as a
chair is really hard to pin down you
need a lot of rules and it would take a
human a long time to evaluate them and
that isn't how the brain works you can
imagine any of our ancestors who thought
well this thing has four legs but it has
a tail so my rules say that it's an
animal the pointy ears and sharp teeth
suggest it's maybe a cat and it's size
suggests perhaps a lion or a tiger
looking at the stripes on the side I can
like you're dead before you're done
counting the legs so Dreyfuss thought
there were problems with the assumptions
that AI researchers were making about
the mind he saw that the model of
cognition that the AI researchers were
using didn't capture the complexity of
human thought and so their reasons for
thinking that computers could do the
things they claimed they could do
weren't very good and he went on to
publish some work including a book
called what computers can't do which
argued that a lot of the things that AI
researchers claimed computers would soon
be able to do were actually impossible
things like pattern recognition natural
language vision complex games and so on
these things didn't just boil down to
symbol manipulation so computers
couldn't do them so how did the AI
researchers react to this philosopher
coming along and telling them that they
were foolishly attempting the impossible
well they did the obvious thing which is
to ignore him and to say unkind things
about it there's a wonderful paper
called the artificial intelligence of
Hubert L Dreyfus which a link to in the
doobly-doo check it out back in the day
before the internet you know people had
to do their flame wars on typewriters
was a different time so having dismissed
him completely they carried on trying to
apply their good old-fashioned AI
techniques to all of these problems for
decades until they find we had to admit
that yeah it wasn't going to work for a
lot of these problems so about some
things at least Dreyfus was right from
the start but the interesting thing is
that since then new techniques have been
developed which has started giving
pretty good results in things like
pattern recognition language translation
high complexity games and so on the kind
of things Dreyfus said computers flatly
couldn't do people say that we moved
away from this good old-fashioned AI
approach which I don't think it's really
true we didn't stop using those take me
at least on the problems that they work
well on we just stopped calling it AI
but the point is the new techniques were
what you might call sub symbolic you
could make a neural network and train it
to recognize tables and chairs and
tigers you can look through the source
code of that system and you won't find
anywhere a single symbol which means
legs or ears or teeth or anything like
that it doesn't work by symbols in the
way that the logic and rules based
approaches of the sixties do so Dreyfus
was right that the AI techniques of the
time weren't able to tackle these
problems but the thing he didn't expect
to happen was computers being able to
use symbols to implement these non
symbolic systems they can tackle the
problems so to oversimplify the AI
researchers said thinking is just symbol
manipulation computers can do symbol
manipulation therefore computers can
think and Dreyfus said thinking is not
just symbol manipulation computers can
only do symbol manipulation that all
computers can't think I don't think
either of those is really right one of
them underestimates what the human mind
can do the other underestimates what
computers can do I think what I take
away from all of this is you can come up
with a simple model that seems to
explain all the important aspects of
some complex system and then it's very
easy to convince yourself that that
model fully covers all of the
complexities and capabilities of that
system but you have to be open to the
possibility that you're missing
something important and the things are
more complex than they seem now you
might say well both sides of this
disagreement made a similar kind of
mistake and they're both wrong I don't
see it that way at all though I mean
someone who says the earth is flat is
wrong someone who says it's a sphere is
wrong as well
it's an oblate spheroid it's bigger
around the equator but then it's not
really an oblate spheroid either they're
perfectly smooth which the earth is not
so you could say that all of those views
are wrong but some of them are clearly
more wrong than others so at the end of
the day can we make computers do any
kind of thinking that humans can do some
people think that now that we have all
these new approaches we have deep
learning and so on and we're able to
start doing the kind of non symbolic
thinking that Dreyfuss pointed out was
necessary we can add that on to the
rules and logic stuff and then we're
nearly done and we're going to ride this
current wave of breakthroughs all the
way up to true
general intelligence and maybe we will
but maybe we won't maybe there's some
third thing that we also need and it's
going to take us several decades to
figure out how to get computers to do
that as well maybe there's a fourth
thing or a fifth thing but I don't think
there's a hundredth thing I don't even
think there's a tenth thing I think
we'll get there sooner or later but I've
been wrong before
so here's the Hubert Dreyfus a great
thinker and a man well ahead of his time
was he right overall probably too soon
to tell but I think he's truly deserving
of our admiration and respect for being
loudly and publicly less wrong than
those around him which is probably the
best any of us can hope for
to end the video with a quick thank you
to my amazing supporters on patreon and
I especially want to thank Fabian
Concilio who sponsors me for $10 a month
I actually have quite a few people
sponsoring me at that level but I
thought I'd thank each one in their own
video though the waiting list is getting
kind of long now I think I might
increase the dollar amount on that
reward level to keep the wait times down
anyway I hope you enjoyed the
behind-the-scenes PC build video I put
up and looking to have some more behind
the scenes stuff going up fairly soon oh
and we hit a target which means I can
get a new lens for this camera which
should really increase the quality and
range of what I can do here so thank you
again and I will see you next time